Dear Dr Ralph,

Thank you very much for submitting your Research Article entitled 'Convergent
Evolution During Local Adaptation to Patchy Landscapes' to PLOS Genetics. Your
manuscript was fully evaluated at the editorial level and by independent peer
reviewers. The reviewers appreciated the attention to an important problem, but
raised some substantial concerns about the current manuscript. Based on the
reviews, we will not be able to accept this version of the manuscript, but we
would be willing to review again a much-revised version. We cannot, of course,
promise publication at that time.

Should you decide to revise the manuscript for further consideration here, your
revisions should address the specific points made by each reviewer. We will
also require a detailed list of your responses to the review comments and a
description of the changes you have made in the manuscript.

If you decide to revise the manuscript for further consideration at PLOS
Genetics, please aim to resubmit within the next 60 days, unless it will take
extra time to address the concerns of the reviewers, in which case we would
appreciate an expected resubmission date by email to plosgenetics@plos.org.

If present, accompanying reviewer attachments are included with this email;
please notify the journal office if any appear to be missing. They will also be
available for download from the link below. You can use this link to log into
the system when you are ready to submit a revised version having first
consulted our Submission Checklist
http://www.plosgenetics.org/static/checklist.action.  Please note, PLOS has
incorporated CrossCheck (http://www.crossref.org/crosscheck.html), powered by
iThenticate, into its journal-wide submission system in order to screen
submitted content for originality before publication. Each PLOS journal
undertakes screening on a proportion of submitted articles. You will be
contacted if needed following the screening process.

You should also be aware that as part of our data availability policy we do not
permit the inclusion of phrases such as "data not shown" or "unpublished
results" in manuscripts. All points should be backed up by data provided with
the submission.

To resubmit, please use the link below and 'Revise Submission' in the
'Submissions Needing Revision' folder.

%REVIEWER_ATTACH_DEEP_LINK%

We are sorry that we cannot be more positive about your manuscript at this
stage. Please do not hesitate to contact us if you have any concerns or
questions.

Yours sincerely,

Philipp W Messer
Guest Editor
PLOS Genetics

Carlos Bustamante
Section Editor: Evolution
PLOS Genetics


Dear Peter and Graham:

I am serving as a guest editor for your manuscript at PLoS Genetics. The
reviewers find that the manuscript addresses an interesting problem and I fully
agree with them on this evaluation. All three reviewers have also requested
major revisions to the manuscript.

As can you see from the reviews, two general points were raised by all
reviewers and I feel that thoroughly addressing both of these points poses a
prerequisite for further consideration of the manuscript:

(i) There needs to be some sort of numerical verification (e.g. with
individual-based simulations) to test the main conclusions, check their
robustness, and identify the parameter ranges for which they hold.

(ii) The presentation of the main result needs to be improved. In particular,
all reviewers feel that the main result can be derived in a simpler and more
intuitive way. I agree with them that at present the manuscript is overly
technical and would benefit strongly from a more intuitive derivation of the
results and discussion of the assumptions under which they hold. The reviewers
provide detailed suggestions on how this can be achieved.

In addition to the above points, the reviewers also made a number of other
comments and suggestions, which by and large appear very reasonable and should
also be addressed in a revised submission.

Sincerely,

Philipp Messer


-----------------------------

Reviewer #1: 

The authors study the relative importance of migration and convergent evolution
for the spread of alleles that are beneficial in isolated patches embedded in a
large background population in which these alleles are deleterious. The basic
model includes diffusive spread in one or two dimensions with logistic
selection on the alleles at constant carrying capacity.

The authors build on previous results for the steady state frequency
distribution of alleles in habitats with spatially varying selection. This
frequency decreases exponentially with length scale \sigma/\sqrt{2 s}.

While the authors attempt to provide some intuitive insight into the results,
the reader still needs to work through a lot of math. I would advocate to give
an extended discussion of the intuition and heuristics the authors developed to
complement the analytical treatment. Am I right that the basic argument is the
following:

A migrant family in unfavorable territory will be typically of size n ~ 1/s
(s=s_m), stick around for a time tau ~ 1/s and be spread out over l ~
\sigma/sqrt(s). Given an equilibrium density \rho*q(x), we need an arrival rate
of migrant families of

k ~ \rho q(x) l/n/tau ~ \rho q(x) l s^2

(smaller rates with larger families and longer sojourn time). The probability
of establishment of at least one member of family is then

P_est = 1 - exp(-p n) ~ 1 - exp(-p_e/s)

where p_e is the establishment probability of a single individual. The result
for lambda_mig will then depend on whether p_e/s is large or small.

for p_e/s large,

lambda_mig = \rho q(x) s^2 l

otherwise,

lambda_mig = \rho q(x) s l p_e

The latter is the case discussed in the manuscript. The other is important too
and should be discussed. I don't seem to be able to identify the equivalent of
l in the author's formulae, but I believe it should be there. After all, rho
q(x) is a density and needs to be multiplied by a length (or area in d=2) to
give a meaningful rate.

To assess the accuracy of the various approximations made, the process should
be simulated and the measured rates explicitly compared to analytical
predictions.


Other issues:

- long range migration. All results depend exponentially on the distance, which
  is a consequence of the model only allowing for short range dispersal. Rare
long range dispersal will alter all these rates dramatically, see for example
recent work by Hallatschek and Fisher.

- Fig 4: Why not use natural units for the axis of these plots:
  R\sqrt(s)/\sigma, rho mu A/s

- in the discussion on page 10 "probability of parallel adaptation.." it should
  be noted that many of the scenarios at high mutation influx are quite
hypothetical. While the colonization of migrants might dominate over local
adaptation, this argument assumes that the migrants are at equilibrium
frequency. The transient to reach this equilibrium might be much longer than
the time required for de novo local adaptation.

- I would like to thank the authors for providing a sensibly arranged pdf (with
  figures and legends in the right place etc.).


-----------------------------


Reviewer #2: See attachment.

-----------------------------


Reviewer #3:

The manuscript provides us with some high-quality and innovative theory on
a very relevant topic [convergent evolution vs. parallel adaptation]. The
presentation of the results is admirably clear in some parts (but less so
in others). I also like the way how you link abstract theory to concrete
biological examples. Although many empirical estimates are very rough, we
do get biological meaning attached to the model parameters and also some
biologically interpretable predictions. The main result that there should
be a lot of convergent evolution in patchy landscapes with short-range
migration is both relevant and robust.

This said, I have several issues that I'd like to see resolved. I also
have some suggestions concerning the presentation. I have added a lot of
detailed (and mostly minor) comments to the ms pdf file, which I include
as attachment with this review. Below, there is just a list of the key
points:

1a. What I miss is a clearer discussion of the scope and limits of the
main results. Take Eq. 13: in its revised form, this is a non-monotonic
function of the selection coefficient s_m. I am almost sure that this is
an artefact and that the parameter range of the theory needs to be
restricted to the part where the transition probability declines with s_m.
But it is not easy to see how this needs to be done in a prober way. We
certainly need a minimal distance among patches. On top of that, we may
need a lower bound for s_m. Both these restrictions (or any other) should
not be just ad-hoc, but motivated from within the theory (see my remarks
at eq. 13).

1b. Linked to this: Figure 4, right panel, shows results in a parameter
range where (I think) the theory does not apply.

1c. Also linked to this: I believe your theory is sound, but it is really
tricky to clearly define its range of application and also to see how good
it is quantitatively. Bottom line: we need individual-based simulations to
test at least some of the main conclusions. E.g.: do simulations for 2
patches in 1d to test the predicted demarcation line between the
"mutation" and the "migration" regime. Do this for several parameter
choices to test the limits of the theory.

2. Section "outflux of migrant alleles": I found this section much less
clear than others and have made suggestions for a clearer presentation
(see ms).

3. Section "length of shared haplotype": This is very handwavy and
(without simulation backup) I find it hard to believe that these results
are accurate. Since it is also not central to the paper, the section
should maybe just be dropped.

